---
title: "Teaching Statement"
collection: teaching
permalink: /teaching/2022-teaching-statement
venue: "Duke University, Physics Department"
location: "Durham, USA"
---
I am a PhD candidate in Physics department at Duke. I have had many opportunities for outreach, teaching, and pedagogical training, including science community outreach through stargazing open houses at the Duke Teaching Observatory; learning about pedagogical practices through the Duke Graduate School’s Certificate in College Teaching and working as a Teaching Assistant (TA) for several Duke physics courses.
I draw my teaching philosophy from the words of French writer, Antoine de Saint Exupéry who wrote, "If you want to build a ship, don't drum up people to collect wood and don't assign them tasks and work, but rather teach them to long for the endless immensity of the sea." I am privileged to be involved in physics education which has a long history of great and inspiring teachers. With the inspiration of Euler and Feynman amongst others guiding me, I partake in teaching this ancient subject. The goal of physics is nothing short of complete understanding of the entire universe and everything that it contains. Achieving this audacious goal is what makes physics learning so challenging. Any course in physics comes associated with it new math, new physical insights and translation of the new math into physical insights.  longing can only be achieved by instilling a sense of wonder and fun amongst students. To instill wonder, I believe in giving examples from day-to-day lives who's perspective is enhanced by the knowledge of physics. Another way is to deal with deep philosophical issues. Still another, is to explain weird, counter-intuitive phenomenon. Providing historical context is also helpful. 
It is important to have fun for learning. So, I make sure students feel they're in a nuturing, safe environmnet while learning. 

Pedagogical research has made it clear that students learn better by actively engaging with course material than by listening to passive lectures [1]. In all of my teaching roles so far, I have implemented practices designed to cultivate an environment of student participation, peer instruction, and question-asking. In my Modern Physics course at Duke, for example, I structured class sessions so that group problem solving could be done once or twice between mini-lectures. This semester, I have been using in-lecture concept questions (with ABCD cards) as well as tutorials with practice questions and challenging group problems. Utilizing class time for these activities has numerous benefits – students share ideas and explain their answers to one another, they have time to process and apply material from a lecture, and I have the opportunity to observe what they are learning and what concepts need to be revisited. Particularly with ABCD cards, students approach numerous eye-opening questions in a low-stakes, interactive format, and they are given opportunities to defend their positions (an exercise that, much like teaching itself, can cause one to realize the limits of one’s own knowledge) with one another. I find that, compared with my lectures in Modern Physics in which I did not utilize concept questions, students are more attentive and invested in my courses with the use of this technique.

While my ideal course structure involves intensive active learning components, I am still searching for the appropriate balances among lectures, outside-of-class readings and assignments, and in-class engagement. I recognize that there are many areas in which I can and should grow as a teacher, and I am prepared to try different research-backed methods in future courses, such as minute papers and interactive lecture demonstrations, to help my students learn more effectively.

A very important aspect of my teaching philosophy is that teachers need to be flexible, both with students experiencing difficulties in a course and themselves as they continue to adopt more effective teaching practices based on their student population and their own strengths. One of the most challenging aspects of teaching for me so far, whether as a graduate student or new faculty member, has been adjusting my expectations in a class that is influenced strongly by the difficulties of the coronavirus pandemic. I have needed to adjust the course pace and workload accordingly, and students and I are now better calibrated given the need to review essential background that was not necessarily discussed in as much depth during the pandemic semesters as it normally would have been.

Flexibility also applies to my growth as an instructor. As I have mentioned earlier, I am passionate about helping students learn, and I recognize that there is much learning that I have ahead as I pursue a career focused on teaching undergraduates. I am excited to develop as a teacher alongside my future colleagues, from whom I would gladly consider advice, ideas, and observations, in College or University programs designed to aid faculty teaching development, and through active engagement with teaching-focused organizations such as the AAPT.
