---
title: 'Bicycle Physics'
date: 2021-08-10
permalink: /posts/2021/08/Bicycle_Physics/
tags:
  - Physics
---
<!-- MathJax -->
<script type="text/javascript"
  src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.3/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

<h1 id="introduction">Introduction</h1>
<p>The mechanical advantage of a bicycle is defined as, <span class="math display">\[MA =\frac{F_{\mathrm{out}}}{F_{\mathrm{in}}}\]</span></p>
<p>Here, <span class="math inline">\(F_{\mathrm{in}}\)</span> is the force applied by cyclist on the pedal and <span class="math inline">\(F_{\mathrm{out}}\)</span> is the forward (frictional) force applied by ground on the bike.<br />
The force on pedal leads to the front gear experiencing a torque given by: <span class="math display">\[\tau=F_{\mathrm{in}}a\]</span> Here, a is the length of the crank arm. Now, this torque leads to a tension on the upper chain(lower chain is loose). So, we get the force applied on the upper chain is <span class="math display">\[F_{\mathrm{chain}}=\frac{\tau}{r_f}=\frac{F_{\mathrm{in}}a}{r_f}\]</span> Here, <span class="math inline">\(r_f\)</span> is the radius of the front gear. If the radius of the rear gear is <span class="math inline">\(r_b\)</span> then the torque applied at the rear wheel, <span class="math inline">\(\tau_b\)</span> is given by: <span class="math display">\[\tau_b= F_{\mathrm{chain}}\,r_b=\frac{F_{\mathrm{in}}a\,r_b}{r_f}\]</span> The force at the circumference of the rear wheel caused by this torque is given by: <span class="math display">\[F_{\mathrm{out}}=\frac{\tau_b}{R}=\frac{F_{\mathrm{in}}a\,r_b}{r_f\,R}\]</span> This gives us our required result, <span class="math display">\[\boxed{
    MA=\frac{a\,r_b}{r_f\,R}
    }\]</span> Since R is much larger than the other quantities in the expression, for a bicycle <span class="math inline">\(MA &lt; 1\)</span>. Since, the work done by rider and static friction will be the same (by conservation of energy), we get an alternate expression for MA of a bicycle, <span class="math display">\[MA= \frac{F_{\mathrm{out}}}{F_{\mathrm{in}}}=\frac{d_{\mathrm{in}}}{d_{\mathrm{out}}}\]</span> Here <span class="math inline">\(d_{\mathrm{in}}\)</span> is the distance moved by the pedal and <span class="math inline">\(d_{\mathrm{out}}\)</span> is the distance moved by the bicycle.<br />
At low gear(<span class="math inline">\(r_b\)</span> small), MA is small so for a given <span class="math inline">\(F_{\mathrm{in}}\)</span>, the forward push would be low but the distance travelled by the bike would be high. Use this mode on steep roads.<br />
At high gear(<span class="math inline">\(r_b\)</span> larger), MA will be comparatively larger so for a given <span class="math inline">\(F_{\mathrm{in}}\)</span>, the forward push would be high but the distance travelled by bike would be low. Use this mode on flat, slightly elevated or sloping roads.</p>

